within their rights to protest rules and
regulations they felt were unfair? Yes, I think it
has to be done in an orderly fashion. There's
procedure and machinery that should be in place in
all the colleges and universities for students, a
mechanism for them to protest. Yes, they're the
consumers, and if there's something that they
think ought to be changed, ought to be a way
provided for them to force those complaints. And,
of course, this is what the student deans are
supposed to do. That's a part of the function is to
look after the interests of the students. And a
student ought to be able to go to the dean's office a
staff member of the dean's staff with a complaint,
and there ought to be a mechanism for addressing
it. In some instances, it can get turned away and
said, don't worry about that. But if the staff
members are doing the job, they're listening. But
of course, the activist movement, the
demonstrations They were taking a rather radical
way procedure for getting themselves hurt, but it
was probably the only mechanism they had.
So I think it caused universities to stop and take
notice and see what changes they need to make to
provide the freedoms that can be accorded to
students within the university structure. And
there are many rules and regulations that get on
the books and just stay there and stay there and
stay there. If somebody doesn't come along and
question them, protest
them. And of course the labor unions used strike.
When they're not getting their way, they'd walk
off the job and strike. Of course, we know some of
the ills that have befallen the business and labor
as a result of that, but that's another topic. But
yes, the students have a right, a right to protest.
Some of the protests resulted in violence, but not
very much of it on the university campus. There was
very little violence. There was some,
and the students' organization could invite
whomever they wanted to to come and speak. We had
Abby Hoffman on the campus, and that was a big
gathering. and lots of people there, and this was,
I'm supposing that this may well have been
sponsored by the Students for the Democratic
Society, I'm not sure, but then Stokely
Carmichael came to the campus, and these were
pretty tense times when we'd have the large
gathering, and of course one of my concerns, and I
expressed it, so someone finally gave me an answer
that satisfied me, I was saying that the trouble
with these big gatherings on the campus, you don't
know whether you're looking at students or
non-students. Some of the people that get there
are maybe from across the country or east coast to
the west coast and all around. And you don't know
what they may be bringing to the campus and
encouraging the students to do. And I said that,
blessed that, several times. And I remember I
started to do it. looked at him and said, the
students know whether they're students or not.
They know who's on the campus. And that was a little
bit comforting. Mickey
Leland, an activist from Houston, was on the
campus several times. And he addressed campus
groups on the campus and he was active in the
Students for a Democratic Society causes on our
campus.
But I think the students have a right to protest.
They have a right to hear whether they want to hear.
Al Kauff was on the campus one time, you know, he's
the creator of Little Abner, and he made a speech to
the students at the student center, and he said
having the students run the university was like
having the inmates run the asylum. He wasn't very
strong student government, student running the
university.
I think that, from my perspective, that many of the
people from the Regents down through the
administration down to our staff level, I think
many of them saw the need for some changes that were
being pointed out by the protest movement. And the
changes have been made. And I think it is a better
climate. and protects all the students' rights
better. And of course what happens is many times
the activists, the protesters, have a pretty
narrow focus and it doesn't include the needs of
all the students, but most of them broad enough to
be good causes. Okay. Okay, could discuss in loco
parentis on the campus and— Well, that's a—it'd
take a long time to discuss it much. I guess
traditionally and historically, our parents
sent their students to the colleges and
universities with the expectation that they
would be looked after, they would be counseled,
they would be required to do certain things. And so
the tradition grew up that school officials,
college and university officials, were going to
take the place of the para when they left home. They
were going to monitor their conduct, they were
going to discipline them when they were out of
line. They were going to send reports back home and
let them know how Johnny and Mary were doing. But in
the climate that existed in the 60s and 70s,
the students didn't want the university to be the
papa and the mama. They didn't want them to serve a
surrogate role of the parent. And so the
university, for several reasons, got out of the
supervision of off-campus housing. The
fraternities and sororities were moved off of the
campus. And
just in general, The life of the student when they
walked on the campus was the regulations applied
when they were on the campus. If they left the
campus to go to Galveston or to Corpus Christi or
somewhere,
that was between them and the legal authorities.
There was the term double jeopardy that students
used to say that They went downtown and got drunk
and got put in jail. They paid a fine and got out of
jail. That ought to be it. But old regulations
provided that when you answered to the civil
authorities, you had to answer to the university
as well. A violation in town was a violation of
university regulations. And when I first went
there, We dealt with students, their conduct off
campus as well as on campus. We were required to by
the regulations, but then it was determined and
decided that surely that was not our area. We
wanted them to be good citizens. We wanted them not
to violate the law, but we didn't want to dictate to
them that much about their private lives. So
that was a relief to get out of that. Yet, as I said
earlier, you give up something, you get
something, and you give up something. You get that
freedom and you give up a certain amount of
protection and buffering and so on that
well-meaning, compassionate staff member at the
University College of the University can
provide. Some of the, I think some of the greatest
members I have about my association with students
at the University is where someone's student has
touched my life or I've touched somebody's life
and it became a, it's become a a lifetime feeling
and a relationship that exists. You don't tell
students what to do and what they can do and what not
to do, but you share with them some thoughts of what
might happen if you do this and what might happen if
you do that. And many students appreciate it.
There was one student that came in the store when we
were down at Buda in the antique store And I heard
his voice, and I thought, George, I believe I've
heard that voice before. And after a while, I said,
I think I know you. He said, yes, Dean Franks. He
says, you suspended me from the university. I
said, I did. And I said, OK. Now I know what it was
about. He had forged a letter to the Dean of Arts and
Sciences his friend who had gone, he belonged to
the Hare Krishna organization. There was funny
looking haircuts and maybe a long flowing kind of a
robe. They've shown pictures of him at the
airports and other places like that. But anyhow,
she'd gone to a national meeting and he forced a
letter to the dean that she was Her grandmother
died, and she'd gone on to be with her grandmother.
Well, it was found out that she hadn't done that,
and he was brought before me, and he admitted to
forging the letter, and I had sold it, and I said,
well, I can take you to a committee and let you plead
your case before a committee, or I'll offer you
suspension from the university for a year. He
said, well, I'll take the suspension from the
university. So he signed a piece of paper. And I
said, well, are you still associated with the
organization? He said, no. I was on the West Coast.
I had a district out there in Oregon or Washington
somewhere. He represented the organization in
that area. Had a national meeting in New York. And
he went to New York. He'd met his mother and dad
there, and they had dinner together, and he was
having a night meeting that night, and so he said
his dad looked at the watch and said, Son, you'd
better go now if you're going to make your meeting.
He said, I'm not going. And then he went ahead and
told me that his folks had pleaded with him to get
out of the organization, but had given up on him.
and getting out of the organization. They were
just going to go ahead and love him anyhow, but he
saw that he shouldn't be doing that. He should get
out of the organization. Well, that was that kind
of a personal relationship that you can establish
with a student, even when you're disciplined. The
discipline itself should have some, I'll use such
a word as curative value, it should have some
value. And of course it can be misused, and I'm sure
I made some mistakes in some of the decisions I made
relative to students. But I
would be a strong advocate for the schools,
college and university, having rules and
regulations that are fair, apply to all students
equally, but the expectations are such that when
you come to be a part of us, you're going to give up
some of your freedom that you have if you're just
out in the community doing your own thing. You have
to have requirements about grade point average.
And of course, the professors usually do the
determination about attendance in class. Some
professors say, three absences and you're out.
Some fellows say, six absences and you're out. And
some people say, don't miss my class unless you're
sick. So in the classroom, there's a a lot of
freedom for the professor to make decisions such
as that. But academic freedom doesn't grant the
freedom to be wrong, whether it's the dean or the
professor, or whatever it is. Well, I guess that
in local parentage business, parents bring their
young college students to the university with the
expectation that there's going to be somebody
there that'll kind of help look after them. And
maybe that that's just an old throwback that's
still lingering with me. I saw 31 freshman classes
in the universities. I participated in many of the
orientation programs. And to this day, I forget
how excited and scared parents and the students
are when they start at the university. Whether you
remember some of your own experiences, the
university is a big old world, you know, and you
need somebody that
will show an interest, offer some guidance and
counseling and information that will make them
feel at home. feel comfortable. Well, we still
need colleges and universities that have
organizations and staff members that are there to
try to help the student wade through the academic
waters, social and academic.
Much freedom we can't afford them, but with some
guidelines Okay, now
if you would, discuss any of the Pacific protest
movements that you remember. Yes, I just thought
about another one. There was an incident that took
place up on the campus resulting from some trees
being prepared to take down on the campus. make
room for an addition to the Memorial Football
Stadium. The university administration and the
regents had done some studies about whether to
move the stadium off of the campus or to enlarge it
in its present location, and it was decided that it
would be best to enlarge the capacity of it right
there on the campus. And in order to do that, the
trees along Walla Creek, many trees, had to come
down. And as soon as word was out that the trees had
to come down in order to make room for the stadium,
several individuals and groups, and I suppose
that the Students for Democratic Society could be
given the credit for organizing a protest there.
It didn't have to be them, it could have been any of
the students who were interested in saving the
trees. Anyhow, the protest was planned. The day
came when the trees were to come down.
My staff and I were there to observe what was going
on. heard the bulldozers as they cranked up. We saw
the students as they placed their bodies between
the bulldozers and the trees. We saw other
students who climbed the trees.
Most of them were talked down, helped down from the
trees by the university police, but one little
girl got up how up and out on a pretty good size limb,
and was just balancing herself up there. And the
police tried to talk her into coming down, but she
wouldn't come down. So one of the university
policemen climbed the tree with a rope and tied it
around the young woman's waist and brought her
down safely and sound. And Mr. Irwin had been, I
guess, on the scene pretty early. He was there by
the time I got there, and I was there pretty early
that morning. He was directing what was going on.
He was telling the bulldozers which trees to get
next. And so there was a great deal of scampering
around. came to me and said, is that Mr. Irvin over
there? And I said, yes. He says, it's all right if I
go and talk to him. I said, I'm not taking
appointments for Mr. Irvin. So he went and visited
with Mr. Irvin a little bit, and then he came back
just as angry as he could be. He said, you know what
he said to me? And I said, no, what did he say? I told
him I didn't think those trees ought to come down,
and he told me in no uncertain terms and with a
little profanity, he didn't give a damn what I
thought. So the trees came down, some of them
pushed over, and most of the people, many of the
people had walked away at this time, but enough
People stayed around to get, oh, I don't know,
three or four pretty good-sized trees and dragged
them by hand up on the campus and propped them up on
the steps of the main building. And there was a
meeting going on inside of the president and some
of his staff and maybe some of the regents. I don't
know exactly who was in that. My staff member and
good friend Ed Price was on the inside of the
meeting, observing what was going on up there, and
I was working the outside, and he heard somebody
say that, uh, I want those, uh, I want those people
that brought those trees up there arrested and put
in jail. And the, Dr. Hackerman was our president
at that time, and Dr. Hackerman stood up and had an
envelope in his hand, and he laid it down on the, uh,
desk and said, gentlemen, I don't want those
students arrested. And they said, if they are
arrested, go help bring in the trees up to the
steps. This is my resignation in this envelope
right here. Well, they didn't get arrested. And so
the president didn't have to tender his
resignation. But I thought it was a great show of
courage on the part of the president to say, don't
want him arrested. Matter of fact, that I saw the
administration lean over backwards several
times to keep from just grabbing somebody up,
hauling off the campus under arrest.
And there was a Maybe I mentioned the sit-in in the
truck wagon where the tires were sliced. I think I
mentioned that. But I believe those incidents
involving a considerable number of students and
non-students and whomever wanted to
participate. And I have to say that there were a
number of faculty members that were in sympathy
with the movements that the SDS organization was
advocating that moved to make some changes in
university policy and regulation. And some of
them were faithful in their attendance at
demonstrations, whether it was at the Pink Lounge
or whether it was downtown for a street
demonstration. They were taking part in it. I
guess if you were to study and analyze a little bit
the organization of a university, you've got
people all the way from one end of the continuum to
the other, from left to right. liberals and
conservatives, and some radicals. And I guess as a
professor at Indiana said, and then the
university said one time in class, they said,
well, we've got some kooks here. Every university
campus has some. But it takes a few kooks to keep the
rest of us straight. Well, kooks is not a good word.
It's a negative word. But it takes people. People
don't have to hold the same ideas to get along. As a
matter of fact, the university is a place to be
exposed to a lot of different philosophies and
ideas. And so
I'm thinking about it after what, 20-some years, I
reckon. And my thinking may not be as clear as it was
when I left the campus. But I left with a good
feeling that I'd had the experience of being
associated with a university of that size, of its
magnitude in academic programs and activities,
and there was a great spirit that
permeates the campus. Many of the people that were
protesting in the 60s and 70s are now the
executives in business and professional
organizations.
I believe that's all about them, that I have to say.
And I can't think of any other
large incident
You're trying to.